---
title: COMP90018 Mobile Computing Systems Programming
shortTitle: COMP90018
order: 2
icon: book-open
category:
  - UniMelb
  - 24S2
tag:
  - Mobile
  - Programming
---

### Does any resource help with this course?

[Ubiquitous Computing Fundamentals](https://research.ebsco.com/c/xppotz/search/details/2n7loxcgbj?limiters=FT1%3AY&q=Ubiquitous+Computing+Fundamentals)

### What is this course about?

This course is an introduction to mobile computing systems programming for engineering students. 


### What is the ubiquitous computing?

A vision of computing in which technology is embedded in the world around us, providing a seamless and unobtrusive experience to users as they go about their daily lives.

### What are the main aspects of UI development for mobile devices?

- Interface: keyboard, screen, transparent/foldable screen, augmented reality
- Computing power
- Technology's progress is fast; human's evolution is slow
- What, why, who, how
- Research: discover, define; design: execute, deliver

### What is the action cycle in UI development?

- The world --> Evaluation --> Goals --> Execution --> The world

### What are the steps involved in the evaluation phase of the action cycle?

- Perceiving the state of the world
- Interpreting the perception
- Evaluation of interpretation

### What are the steps involved in the execution phase of the action cycle?

- Intention to act
- Sequence of actions
- Execution of the sequence of actions

### What is cross-platform design in UI development?

- Designing for multiple devices such as watches, phones, etc.

### What are the key aspects of usability in UI development?

- Learnability
- Efficiency
- Memorability
- Errors
- Satisfaction

### What is the relationship between technology and human perception?

- Technology --> Perception/experiences of reality --> Manipulate humans (good and bad)

### What is ubiquitous interaction?

- Interaction that occurs on the user vs in the environment

### What is the hardware renaissance?

- Rapid prototyping 快速原型设计
- Mass customization 大规模定制
- Cheap development 低成本开发

### What is Moore's Law?

- The number of transistors on a chip doubles every two years 每两年芯片上的晶体管数量翻倍

### How do sensors convert physical phenomena into data?

- Physical magnitude/phenomenon 物理量/现象 --> Sensor --> Data

### What are some examples of mobile sensors?

- Camera
- Magnetometer 磁力计
- Ambient light sensor 环境光传感器
- Gyroscope 陀螺仪
- Microphone
- Barometer 气压计
- GPS
- Fingerprint 指纹

### What is the activity lifecycle in the context of sensors?

- When listening, when not listening, i.e., battery concern

### How is measurement represented in signal processing?

- $z_i  = x_i + v_i$
  - $z_i$: Measurement
  - $x_i$: True value
  - $v_i$: Noise, in the form of Gaussian distribution

### What is a mean filter?

- $\bar{x} = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=1}^{n} x_i$

### What are the characteristics of mean/median filters?

- Easy to implement
- Efficient
- Great cost benefit
- Laggy 滞后的
- No dynamic model

### What are the characteristics of a Kalman filter?

- Predictive
- Dynamic model
- No lag
- Tunable trade-off between model and measurement
- Uncertainty estimate
- Cheap to run
- Parameter not intuitive
- Overshooting 超调

### What are the key components of a location-based system?

- Reality reproduction
  - Acquisition
  - Processing
  - Display
  - Perception

### What is the history of the Global Positioning System (GPS)?

- GPS has been in use since 1970

### What are some examples of indoor localization?

- Nintendo 3DS

### What are the types of localization systems?

- Client-based location system
  - Device computes its own location
  - GPS
  - Privacy, local computation power
- Network-based location system
  - Network infrastructure calculates the position of the device
  - Active Badge system
  - Low cost, low privacy
- Network-assisted location system
  - Assisted GPS (基站)
  - Fast, accurate, data charge

### How can location be represented?

- Absolute: address, GPS coordinates
- Relative: A is 3km south of B
- Symbolic: descriptive, e.g., home, work

### What are the methods to determine location?

- Proximity 接近度
  - If in a range
  - Strength of signal
  - Time of flight (ToF)
- Trilateration 三边定位
  - 3 circles determine a point
- Hyperbolic lateration 双曲线定位
  - Signal arrival time
- Triangulation 三角定位
  - Angle of arrival (AoA)
  - Antenna
- Fingerprint
  - Signal characteristic
  - Temporal stability
  - Spatial variability
  - Collect data --> training --> localization
- Dead reckoning
  - Direction computed from previously
  - Location
  - Elapsed time
  - Direction
  - Average speed
- Visual localization
  - Cameras, depth sensors
  - Structure from Motion (SfM)
  - Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (vSLAM)

### What is the goal of context awareness?

- Intelligent behaviors

### What types of context/information are used in context awareness?

- Location, time, event, environment, etc.

### What did Mark Weiser say about profound technologies?

- “The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it.” Mark Weiser, 1991

### What are proactive applications?

- Applications that anticipate user needs

### How is data collected in context awareness?

- Tagging, sharing

### What is the Human Activity Recognition (HAR) System?

- Execution
- Generalization
- Recognition
- Activities
- System model

### What factors should be considered when choosing a sensor?

- Accuracy: how close to the true value
- Precision: how close to each other
- Operating range
- Resolution or sensitivity
- Cost
- Energy consumption
- Lifespan

### What are the steps in handling data for context awareness?

- Raw data
- Preprocessing
- Segmentation
- Feature extraction
- Classification
- Context determination
### What are the design techniques used in prototyping?

- Sketching: ideation, refinement
- Storyboarding
- Prototyping: evaluation, usability

### What are the stages of a low-fidelity prototype?

- Concept of operation
- Requirement and architecture
- Detailed design
- Implementation
- Integration, test and verification
- System verification and validation
- Operation and maintenance

### What should be prototyped?

- Workflow, task
- Screen layouts and information displays
- Difficult, controversial, critical areas
- ...

### What is the difference between fidelity and functionality in prototyping?

- Fidelity vs functionality

### What are the types of prototyping?

- Evolutionary vs throwaway
- Horizontal vs vertical
  - Horizontal: all screens, no functionality
  - Vertical: some functionality in some screens

### What should you consider when testing your project?

- Which aspect of your project do you want to test?
- Keep it cheap and dirty
- Encourage feedback!

### What is the difference between native and cross-platform development?

- Native: rich APIs, all functions, need license
- Cross-platform: HTML5

### What are some frameworks for mobile development?

- RN: Facebook, JS
- Flutter: Google, Dart
- Xamarin: Microsoft, C#
- Ionic: PWAs
- PhoneGap: Adobe, HTML, CSS, JS
- jQuery Mobile

### What is AWARE?

- A platform for mobile sensing

### Why evaluate?

- Cause and effect: with isolation
- Predictions
- Test a hypothesis

### What is the difference between causation and correlation?

- Causation vs correlation

### What are the components of experimental design?

- Independent variables
- Dependent variables
- Conditions
- Repeated measures
- Independent measures

### What is the difference between experimental and quasi-experimental design?

- If it is random

### What are the steps to create a focus group?

- Create
- Plan
- Run

### What is ethnography?

- Observe
- Interview
- Participate

### What is the Wizard-of-Oz technique?

- Don't implement the hard part
- 用户认为他们在与一个自动化系统交互，但实际上是人在后台手动操作

### What are Nielsen’s usability heuristics?

- Match between system and the real world
- Consistency and standards
- Help and documentation
- User control and freedom
- Visibility of system status
- Flexibility and efficiency
- Error prevention
- Recognition rather than recall
- Error reporting, diagnosis 诊断, and recovery
- Aesthetic and minimalist design 美观和简约设计

### What are some general heuristics for usability?

- Meet expectations
- User is the boss
- Handle errors
- Keep it simple

### What are the privacy and security concerns in location-based services?

- Private information
- Traffic monitoring
- Social networking
- Advertising

### What is rendezvousing?

- 设备或节点在网络中相互发现和通信的过程

### What does it mean to be stealthy in location-based services?

- Be at a location without anyone knowing you are there
- Passive devices such as GPS

### What is anonymity in location-based services?

- Separate location information from an individual’s identity

### What is K-anonymity?

- Every record in the table is indistinguishable from at least k-1 other records with respect to quasi identifiers

### What is cloaking in location-based services?

- 隐藏用户的精确位置，通过提供一个较大的区域来模糊实际位置

### What is a decentralized system?

- No central authority

### What is negative information?

- Any information except positive information

### What are some methods of social engineering?

- Password
  - DAS （draw a secret）
  - Passpoints (click on a picture)
  - Passfaces (recognize faces)

### What are CAPTCHAs?

- Completely automated public Turing test to tell computers and humans apart

### What are some long-standing privacy/security issues?

- Prove your device is where you claim to be
- Associate with other devices
- Authenticate in public
- Multi-model authentication

### What are the characteristics of augmented reality?

- Interact with the real world
- Real-time
- 3D

### What technologies are used in augmented reality?

- Tracking
- Display
- Input

### What are the limitations of augmented reality?

- Registration of information
- Tracking error
- Latency
- Visual field of view
- Depth cue mismatch
- Impact of lighting conditions
- Uncomfortable technology

### What is an interesting experiment in augmented reality?

- AR for drunk/sleepy people

### What is an advanced evaluation method?

- Crowdsourcing

### What topics were covered in the guest lecture on mobile sensing and edge intelligence?

- Gait analysis
- Mobile sports analytics
- On-device LLM